Patient Education

 

Common Disorders



Peripheral Neuropathy

 

What is Peripheral Neuropathy?



Peripheral neuropathy is damage of the peripheral nerves. Your peripheral nerves are the nerves that travel to your arms and legs. When the nerves are damaged, they don't function properly. People with peripheral neuropathy have decreased or abnormal sensation in their toes and fingers. Sometimes, they develop problems moving these parts of the body as well.



Causes



In the United States, the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy is diabetes. According to the American Diabetes Association, 60 to 70 percent of people with diabetes will develop neuropathy within their lifetime.



Other causes of peripheral neuropathy include:

Certain medications, including some chemotherapy drugs.

Heredity. Some people have a family history of peripheral neuropathy.

Advanced age. Peripheral neuropathy is more common as people age.

Arthritis. Certain type of arthritis, especially involving the back, can cause peripheral neuropathy.

Alcoholism. According to the US National Library of Medicine, up to half of all long-term heavy alcohol users develop peripheral neuropathy.

Neurological disorders. Certain neurological disorders, including spina bifida and fibromyalgia, are associated with peripheral neuropathy.

Injury. Acute injury to the peripheral nerves may also cause peripheral neuropathy. 



Symptoms



The most common symptoms of peripheral neuropathy include burning, numbness, tingling, or shooting or stabbing pain in the toes and/or fingertips. Any change in sensation in the fingers or toes may be a symptom of peripheral neuropathy. Be sure to report any abnormal sensations to your doctor. Those sensations may be the first sign of another problem, such as diabetes.



Home Care



If you have peripheral neuropathy, it is important to inspect your feet regularly. Because decreased sensation may develop eventually, you might not notice an injury or infection. Someone who has diabetes and peripheral neuropathy with loss of protective sensation, for instance, could step on a tack without noticing it. Regularly inspect your feet so you can note any injuries or infections and seek appropriate medical attention as needed. 



If you're unable to properly inspect your own feet, enlist a family member or friend to help you, or use a mirror. It's absolutely essential that any injuries are caught and treated promptly. Otherwise, an infection can develop and progress.



People with peripheral neuropathy should wear properly fitted shoes and avoid walking barefoot to prevent injury. If you have diabetes, it's important to control your blood sugar as well, because out-of-control blood sugar leads to increased nerve damage. Take your insulin or medication as prescribed and follow the recommended diet.



When to Visit a Podiatrist



Everyone with symptoms of peripheral neuropathy of the feet should see a podiatrist. Podiatrists are doctors who are specially trained to preserve the health of the feet.



Diagnosis and Treatment



A podiatrist, family physician, internist, or physician who specializes in diabetes can diagnose peripheral neuropathy. The diagnosis is made on the basis of a physical exam, health history, and your reporting of symptoms. The doctor may order a blood test to check your blood sugar level because high blood sugar levels and diabetes are an important cause of peripheral neuropathy.



There is no known cure for peripheral neuropathy. The goal of treatments is to slow the progression of the disease, to maintain foot health, and to decrease pain (if present) and improve the quality of life.



The podiatrist may prescribe oral medication to help with symptoms. He or she will also perform a thorough foot check to look for any injuries or infections and will teach you how to do the same. Your podiatrist will also show you how to take care of your feet at home. People who have peripheral neuropathy should have their feet examined by a podiatrist at least once per year. 



Prevention

A healthy diet, increased physical activity, and well-controlled blood sugars, along with regular visits to your podiatrist, may help to avoid complications of diabetes such as peripheral neuropathy.

 

Source: https://www.apma.org/Patients/FootHealth.cfm?ItemNumber=1864



