COVID-19 / Coronavirus Information



This is information I got from Google and other Sources as a guide of what to write.  If you have something delete, edit, or add what you need for content.  I edited some of the wording to fit Maryland. 

 

Policy and Procedures for office visits



-- insert information here –



As part of Maryland’s Healthcare Community, we are committed to the health and safety of our patients, community, and providers. We have all been through a lot during the last few months and we are happy to inform you that we are scheduling office appointments to address all of your Podiatry needs.  Please call our office to schedule your appointment.



Fortunately, as a medical and surgical practice, many of our clean and sterile techniques are second nature to us and due to COVID-19, we have already implemented special measures to ensure the safety of our patients and our staff:

 

Before your appointment, our office will call you to ask you a few questions about your travel, health, and symptoms.

We will strictly adhere to social distancing guidelines and schedule appointments accordingly. For this reason, please make your best effort to arrive on time.

When you arrive at the office, we will take your temperature.

Please use hand sanitizer on arrival and follow our hand cleansing instructions.

We will be wearing masks and we will also ask you to wear a mask for the duration of your visit, or please let us know if you would like one from our supply.

We recognize the support that a companion can provide during appointments but we ask that you understand the need to limit the number of people in our office to minimize the risk to other patients and staff. Therefore, office visits are currently for patients only.

We will deep clean each room, exam chair, door handle before and after each visit.



Your comfort and safety are our priority. Please feel free to contact us with any questions or concerns. We have missed you all and look forward to safely and confidently caring for you at your next appointment at OBGYN Westside.









When not to come



-- insert information or edit --



Patient Screening Questions:

 

Please do not come to the office if your answer to any of the following questions is yes, and call to schedule a telehealth visit instead:

 

Do you have any of the following symptoms?

Chills or Fever (100°F or more)

Cough

Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing

Fatigue

Muscle or body aches

Headache

New loss of taste or smell

Sore throat

Congestion or runny nose

Nausea or vomiting

Diarrhea

In the last 14 days have you been exposed to any who has, or is suspected of having, COVID-19?

Have you tested positive for COVID-19 within the last 14 days?

Within the last 14 days have you visited any State affected by Maryland’s quarantine order?

 





Safety Measures the office is taking



-- insert safety measures here --









Symptoms



COVID-19 affects different people in different ways. Infected people have had a wide range of symptoms reported – from mild symptoms to severe illness.

 

Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus. People with these symptoms may have COVID-19:

Fever or chills

Cough

Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing

Fatigue

Muscle or body aches

Headache

New loss of taste or smell

Sore throat

Congestion or runny nose

Nausea or vomiting

Diarrhea



Look for emergency warning signs for COVID-19. If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately:



Trouble breathing

Persistent pain or pressure in the chest

New confusion

Inability to wake or stay awake

Bluish lips or face

Prevention

 

The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus. Learn how COVID-19 spreads and practice these actions to help prevent the spread of this illness.

 

To help prevent the spread of COVID-19, everyone should:

Clean your hands often, either with soap and water for 20 seconds or a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.

Avoid close contact with people who are sick.

Put distance between yourself and other people (at least 6 feet).

Cover your mouth and nose with a mask when around others.

Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the trash.

Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces daily.

CDC recommends that people wear masks in public settings and when around people outside of their household, especially when other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.

Masks may help prevent people who have COVID-19 from spreading the virus to others.



CDC.gov



Links & Resources

 

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/index.html

 

https://coronavirus.maryland.gov/

 

https://covidlink.maryland.gov/content/









