Patient Education

 

Common Disorders



High Blood Pressure

 

What Is High Blood Pressure?



High blood pressure is also known as hypertension. Hypertension occurs when your blood pressure rises and stays above normal over a period of time.



Hypertension is often related to atherosclerosis, which is the buildup of plaque in blood vessels, often associated with an increase in your "bad" cholesterol. This condition can also lead to decreased circulation and peripheral arterial disease (PAD). People with decreased circulation in their legs and feet may develop ulcerations (open wounds on the skin) that can lead to amputations.



As a member of the health-care team, your podiatrist is also concerned about hypertension and vascular disease (heart and circulatory problems). Make sure you tell your podiatrist if you have high blood pressure and any medications that you may be taking for treatment.



Symptoms



Symptoms of poor circulation in the feet and legs may include:

Cramping in the feet and legs, particularly with exercise

Sores on the feet or legs 

Changes in color to the feet

Changes in temperature to the feet

Loss of hair on the feet and legs



Uncontrolled hypertension can also lead to heart disease, which may present as swelling in your feet and legs.



When to Visit a Podiatrist



If you experience any of the above symptoms, it is important to visit a podiatrist. And if you have been diagnosed with hypertension, it is important to tell your podiatrist, because medications that may be prescribed for a foot or ankle condition could interact with your blood pressure medications. Also, if you need to have foot or ankle surgery, it is important that your blood pressure is under control prior to any surgical procedures.



Diagnosis and Treatment



As part of your visit, your podiatrist may check your vital signs—height, weight, and blood pressure. Your podiatrist will conduct a careful examination to determine if there is lower than normal temperature in any of the extremities, absence of normal skin color, or diminished circulation in the feet. Your podiatrist may also ask you about increased or periodic swelling in the lower extremities.



If any abnormalities in your blood pressure are noted, your podiatrist will notify you and may refer you to your primary care physician for further evaluation and treatment.

 

Source: https://www.apma.org/Patients/FootHealth.cfm?ItemNumber=1524



