

Current Page Set Up





Home Page

What is a Podiatrist

Our Services

Foot Problems

Common Disorders

Foot Care

Patient Information

Contact Us





Proposed Page Set Up





Home Page

About Us / Our Practice

About the Practice, History, Mission & Vision

Dr. Scruggs / Bio

Services

Patient Center / New Patients / Patient Information

COVID-19 / Coronavirus Response

Patient Education

What Is A Podiatrist?

Common Disorders

Foot Problems

Links

Reviews / Testimonials

Contact Us

Appointment Request









Documents, Content, and Media

 

Media

 

Gather, send, and take photos.  (Examples)

 

Office, Lobby/Waiting Room, Exam Room

Dr, Staff, Group Photo, Patient Interaction





COVID-19 / Coronavirus

 

Policy and Procedures for office visits

Symptoms

When not to come

Safety Measures the office is taking

Links













Home Page

 

Welcome message



-- insert new welcome message --





Current Website Text

 

As many of our readers are aware, we’ve grown! In order to meet the challenges of new techniques and technologies, Scruggs Podiatry had to make a move to accommodate our growing needs. We believed that the best way to continue to provide a full range of state of the art podiatric services to our patients was to expand our facilities to meet your needs. With this mission in mind we moved into our new office suite at 19 Walker Avenue, Suite 200 in Pikesville! The office provides easier access and more parking while providing the latest in cutting edge techniques and equipment and maintaining the warmth and individual attention that I have prided myself since I started my solo medical practice over 15 years ago.

 

We look forward to continuing to provide a modern center of excellence to meet the needs of our patients. Our goal, as always, is to apply the art and science of podiatry to provide the utmost care of one of the most important parts of the body: your feet.













About Scruggs Podiatry

 

Information about the Practice, History, Mission & Vision



-- insert bio --











 

Dr. Scruggs Bio paragraph(s)



-- insert bio --









New Photo(s)

Suggest separate sections after paragraph(s) for the following:



Education(Information)



Certifications(Information)



Postgraduate Training(Information)



Professional Affiliations/Associations/Memberships (Choose which term)(Information)



Hospital Affiliations(Information) 

Staff (Do you want to include your staff?)

Photo / Name / Position







Current Website Text



Dr. Ditra S. Scruggs, DPM

Podiatrist/Surgeon

 

Dr. Scruggs graduated from Lincoln University of with a B.S. in Biology/Pre-Med in 1984. She graduated from the Ohio College of Podiatric Medicine in 1991. After completing her podiatric medical residency at VA of Baltimore she entered private practice in 1993. She regularly attends educational seminars to keep up with the latest trends in podiatry.

 

She is a member of the American Podiatric Medical Association as well as the Maryland Podiatric Medical Association





 





 

Services

 

List Core Services

Should they be categorized?



-- insert services or edit list below –







Current Website Text

 

Diagnosis and specialized treatment of:

 

Achilles Tendon

Ankle Instability

Ankle Sprains

Arthritic Foot & Ankle Care

Athletes Foot

Bunions

Calluses

Corns

Crush Injuries

Diabetic Foot Infections

Flat Feet

Fungus Toenails

Geriatric Foot Care

Hammertoes

Heel Spurs

Infections

Ingrown Toenails

Injuries

Metatarsalgia

Neuromas

Plantar Fasciitis

Poor Circulation

Warts

Wounds

 

 

Patient Center / New Patients / Patient Information

 

Patient Forms



New Patient Forms  (Electronic MS Word)

Privacy Statement (HIPPA) & Form they sign saying they received it  (Electronic MS Word)



-- edit current website text below --



Please print and fill out these forms so we can expedite your first visit:

 

Patient Information

Physician Information

List of Medications

PAD Assessment





Payment Info for Patients



-- insert information --



Scheduling and Cancellations (example below: cancellation fee for missed appointments)

 

-- edit example below –



Please call our office to schedule an appointment. If you are unable to make your appointment, please notify us 24 hours in advance. 

 

What to bring to your appointment: (example below)



-- edit example below --

 

Insurance card

Names of your other doctors

List of all current medications, or bring them with you

Any online forms you filled out prior to your appointment

Recent medical records or x-rays will be helpful and may save you time and charges if you are seeking a second opinion or transferring your care

 

When to arrive: (example below)



-- edit example below --

 

Please arrive 15 minutes before your scheduled appointment time to complete any forms. We strive to stay on schedule and do not double-book our patients. New patients may require as much as 60 minutes for their initial evaluation depending on their condition.

 



Updated Insurance List

 

-- edit current website text --



Insurance



Scruggs Podiatry can offer you a wide range of insurance options and currently accepts the following coverage. Call us at 410-653-7744 for additional information or to schedule a visit.



Participant Insurance Companies

 

Aetna PPO/HMO/Open Choice/Managed Choice/Elect Choice/US Healthcare

Alliance PPO//Mamsi

Anthem/Trigon

Cigna PPO, HMO

Optimum Choice/Optimum Choice Preferred & Advantage/MDIPA/MDIPA Preferred

America’s Health Plan

Blue Cross of Maryland and National Accounts

Blue Cross of the National Capital Area

Blue Cross of Virginia (Trigon)

Capital Care

Champus/Champva/Tricare

Medicare

Mail Handlers

NCPPO, NCAS

National Association of Letter Carriers

United Health Care (will see out of network)

Pennsylvania Blue Shield

Preferred Health Network

Coventry Healthcare



All Private Insurance Companies and Self Pay, Cash, Check, Visa, MasterCard





 

Contact Us

 

Update Office Hours 



-- edit current website text below --



By Appointment Only

Mon: 9am-6pm

Tue & Wed: Closed

Thur: 10am-5pm

Fri: 10am-1:00pm



Verify Address, Phone Numbers, Contact Numbers



-- edit current website text below --



Office Location



Walker Professional Building

19 Walker Avenue, Suite 200

Pikesville, MD 21208

Phone: 410.653.7744 

Fax: 410.653.7745

Email: ScruggsPodiatry@verizon.net





 

Appointment Request Form (Phase II)

 

Software & Pricing

 

 

Patient Education

 

What Is A Podiatrist?



-- edit current website text below --



What is a Podiatrist?

 



 

A podiatrist, also called a doctor of podiatric medicine, is a specialist who provides medical diagnosis and treatment of foot and ankle problems, including, but not limited to sprains and fractures, bunions, heel pain/spurs, hammertoes, neuromas, ingrown toenails, warts, corns and calluses. A podiatrist also renders care of sprains, fractures, infections, and injuries of the foot, ankle and heel. Four years of undergraduate medical school training and four years of podiatric medical school to obtain their podiatric medical degree. Typically, they complete post graduate residency training in podiatric primary care, orthopededics and/or surgery. Podiatrists are required to take state and national exams, as well as be licensed by the state in which they practice.

 

According to the American Podiatric Medical Association, there are more than 17,800 practicing podiatrists in the United States. Podiatrists are in demand more than ever today because of a rapidly aging population. In addition, according to the association, foot disorders are among the most widespread and neglected health problems affecting people in this country.

 

Typically, Podiatrists will:

 

Consult with the patient and other physicians on how to prevent foot problems.

Diagnose and treat tumors, ulcers, fractures, skin and nail diseases and deformities.

Perform surgeries to correct or remedy such problems as bunions, clawtoes, fractures, hammertoes, infections, and ruptured Achilles and other ligaments and tendons.

Prescribe therapies and perform diagnostic procedures such as ultrasound and lab tests.

Prescribes or fits patients with inserts called orthotics that correct walking patterns.

Treat conditions such as: bone disorders, bunions, corns, calluses, cysts, heel spurs, infections, ingrown nails, and plantar fasciitis.





Common Disorders



-- edit current website text below --





Achilles Tendonitis & Flat Feet

Arthritic Conditions

Athlete's Foot

Bunions

Corns & Callouses

Custom Orthotics

Diabetic Wound Care

Fungus Nails

Haglund's Deformity

Hammertoes

Heel Pain & Bone Spurs

High Blood Pressure

Ingrown Nails

Neuromas

Peripheral Arterial Disease

Peripheral Neuropathy

Psoriasis

Skin Cancers of the Feet

Sprains, Strains & Fractures

Surgery

Sweaty Feet

Warts & Growths





Foot Problems



-- edit current website text below --



Foot Problems

 



 

Foot and ankle problems usually fall into the following categories:

 

Acquired from improper footwear, physical stress, or small mechanical changes within the foot.

Arthritic foot problems, which typically involve one or more joint.

Congenital foot problems, which occur at birth, are generally inherited.

Infectious foot problems, which are caused by bacterial, viral, or fungal disorders.

Neoplastic disorders, usually called tumors, which are the result of abnormal growth of tissue and may be benign or malignant.

Traumatic foot problems, which are associated with foot and ankle injuries.

 

The Top Foot Problems Are:

 

Bunions

 

Misaligned big toe joints that can become swollen and tender, causing the first joint of the big toe to slant outward, and the second joint to angle toward the other toes. Bunions tend to be hereditary but can be aggravated by shoes that are too narrow in the forefoot and toe. Surgery is frequently performed to correct the problem.

 

Hammertoe

 

A condition, usually stemming from muscle imbalance, in which the toe is bent in a claw-like position. It occurs most frequently with the second toe, often when a bunion slants the big toe toward and under it, but any of the other three smaller toes can be affected. Selecting shoes and socks that do not cramp the toes will alleviate aggravation.

 

Heel Spurs

 

Growths of bone on the underside, forepart of the heel bone. Heel spurs occur when the plantar tendon pulls at its attachment to the heel bone. This area of the heel can later calcify to form a spur. With proper warm-up and the use of appropriate athletic shoes, strain to the ligament can be reduced.

 

Ingrown Nails

 

Toenails whose corners or sides dig painfully into the skin. Ingrown toenails are frequently caused by improper nail trimming, but also by shoe pressure, injury, fungus infection, heredity, and poor foot structure. Women are much more likely to have ingrown toenails than men. Ingrown nails can be prevented by trimming toenails straight across, selecting proper shoe style and size - not too tapered or shallow - and paying special attention to foot pain.

 

Neuromas

 

Enlarged benign growths of nerves, most commonly between the third and fourth toes. They are caused by tissue rubbing against and irritating the nerves. Pressure from ill-fitting shoes or abnormal bone structure can also lead to this condition. Treatments include orthoses (shoe inserts) and/or cortisone injections, but surgical removal of the growth is sometimes necessary.

 

Plantar Fasciitis (Heel Pain)

 

Usually caused by an inflammation on the bottom of the foot. Our practice can evaluate arch pain and may prescribe customized shoe inserts called orthoses to help alleviate the pain.

 

Sesamoiditis

 

Inflammation or rupture of the two small bones (sesamoids) under the first metatarsal bones. Proper shoe selection and orthoses can help.

 

Shin Splints

 

Pain to either side of the leg bone, caused by muscle or tendon inflammation. It is commonly related to excessive foot pronation (collapsing arch) but may be related to a muscle imbalance between opposing muscle groups in the leg. Proper stretching and corrective orthoses (shoe inserts) for pronation can help prevent shin splints.

 

Stress Fractures

 

Incomplete cracks in bone caused by overuse. With complete rest, stress fractures heal quickly. Extra padding in shoes helps prevent the condition. Stress fractures left untreated may become complete fractures, which require casting and immobilization.

 

 

 

 

 

 





Links (New Section / Page)













 

Reviews / Testimonials / Marketing (Phase I & II)

 

Link to post review to Google

Feedback Survey (What to improve feedback sent to email)

Embed Reviews into Webpages (Goal) 

Client Email List to send emails 



