Patient Education



Foot Problems



-- edit current website text below --



Foot Problems

 

Foot and ankle problems usually fall into the following categories:

 

Acquired from improper footwear, physical stress, or small mechanical changes within the foot.

Arthritic foot problems, which typically involve one or more joint.

Congenital foot problems, which occur at birth, are generally inherited.

Infectious foot problems, which are caused by bacterial, viral, or fungal disorders.

Neoplastic disorders, usually called tumors, which are the result of abnormal growth of tissue and may be benign or malignant.

Traumatic foot problems, which are associated with foot and ankle injuries.

 

The Top Foot Problems Are:

 

Bunions

 

Misaligned big toe joints that can become swollen and tender, causing the first joint of the big toe to slant outward, and the second joint to angle toward the other toes. Bunions tend to be hereditary but can be aggravated by shoes that are too narrow in the forefoot and toe. Surgery is frequently performed to correct the problem.

 

Hammertoe

 

A condition, usually stemming from muscle imbalance, in which the toe is bent in a claw-like position. It occurs most frequently with the second toe, often when a bunion slants the big toe toward and under it, but any of the other three smaller toes can be affected. Selecting shoes and socks that do not cramp the toes will alleviate aggravation.

 

Heel Spurs

 

Growths of bone on the underside, forepart of the heel bone. Heel spurs occur when the plantar tendon pulls at its attachment to the heel bone. This area of the heel can later calcify to form a spur. With proper warm-up and the use of appropriate athletic shoes, strain to the ligament can be reduced.

 

Ingrown Nails

 

Toenails whose corners or sides dig painfully into the skin. Ingrown toenails are frequently caused by improper nail trimming, but also by shoe pressure, injury, fungus infection, heredity, and poor foot structure. Women are much more likely to have ingrown toenails than men. Ingrown nails can be prevented by trimming toenails straight across, selecting proper shoe style and size - not too tapered or shallow - and paying special attention to foot pain.

 

Neuromas

 

Enlarged benign growths of nerves, most commonly between the third and fourth toes. They are caused by tissue rubbing against and irritating the nerves. Pressure from ill-fitting shoes or abnormal bone structure can also lead to this condition. Treatments include orthoses (shoe inserts) and/or cortisone injections, but surgical removal of the growth is sometimes necessary.

 

Plantar Fasciitis (Heel Pain)

 

Usually caused by an inflammation on the bottom of the foot. Our practice can evaluate arch pain and may prescribe customized shoe inserts called orthoses to help alleviate the pain.

 

Sesamoiditis

 

Inflammation or rupture of the two small bones (sesamoids) under the first metatarsal bones. Proper shoe selection and orthoses can help.

 

Shin Splints

 

Pain to either side of the leg bone, caused by muscle or tendon inflammation. It is commonly related to excessive foot pronation (collapsing arch) but may be related to a muscle imbalance between opposing muscle groups in the leg. Proper stretching and corrective orthoses (shoe inserts) for pronation can help prevent shin splints.

 

Stress Fractures

 

Incomplete cracks in bone caused by overuse. With complete rest, stress fractures heal quickly. Extra padding in shoes helps prevent the condition. Stress fractures left untreated may become complete fractures, which require casting and immobilization.

